Running an oracle (#394)
celo-org/docs: docs/getting-started/running-oracles.md

---
title: Running oracles

> description: How to run an oracle for Ment, the stability protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to run an oracle for Mento, the stability protocol.
```

---

Oracles are a fundamental piece for Mento, the stability protocol behind Celo stable assets. Their propose is to forward to the blockchain the price of CELO/USD, CELO/EUR and CELO/BRL. You can read the [Celo Oracle documentation](celo-codebase/protocol/stability/oracles) to get an overview of how they work.

# Getting started

> Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from the centralized exchanges (CEX) and push them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and push them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).
```

A [reference implementation](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle) of such client is written in TypeScript and would be used for this guide. Releases for this client can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/releases).

## Requriments
* One VM dedicated for each oracle is recommended, but it is acceptable that they run multiple instances in the case they are for different stables.
* A dedicated full node running in its own VM. Minimal hardware requirements and instructiosn on how to run a full node can be found [here](/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#:~:text=Full%20nodes%20play%20a%20special,other%20full%20nodes%20and%20validators.).

> * The private keys of an address on Celo. It can be hosted via a private key, HMS or accounts hosted in the full nodes itselfs. More information about eache can be found below.

Reviewer: Is there more than one key? (honest question)

```suggestion
* The private key of an address on Celo, which can be stored on a private key file, on a HMS or hosted in the full nodes itself. More information about each can be found below.
```

It is not strictly required but it is recommended to have the [Celo CLI](/command-line-interface/introduction#what-is-the-celo-cli) avaiable at least in your local enviroment, and ideally in each VM. It could be specially useful to respond to on-call.

> ## Setting up the enviromnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setting up the environment
```

Find the latest stable Docker Image for the oracle in the oracle releases [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/releases).

> From the oracle VM, make sure you can access your node. This can be done via the Celo CLI with this command:

Reviewer: I'd suggest not specifying a VM.

`celocli node:synced --node YOUR_NODE_HOSTNAME:YOUR_NODE_PORT`

:::warning

> Using Forno or other public full node providers to run the oracles in production is strongly unencouraged. Oracles doing so wouldn't be elegible for rewards.

Reviewer: How could it be known how the oracle is reporting?

### Running with HSM

Using HSM is the recommended way to store the keys for the oracles. Currently supported HSM are Azure and AWS. If you're have already configured HSM, the relevant variables to add to your `.env.prod` are:

AWS:
* `WALLET_TYPE=AWS_HSM`
* `AWS_KEY_REGION`

Azure:
* `WALLET_TYPE=AZURE_HSM`
* `AZURE_KEY_VAULT_NAME`

### Using a private key

:::warning
This method is not recommended in production as the private key remains unencrypted in the VM.
:::

You can create a new private key with:

`$ celocli account:new`

The output field of `privateKey` should be stored to a file and its path should be set in the env variable `PRIVATE_KEY_PATH`. Aditionally `WALLET_TYPE` should also be set to `PRIVATE_KEY`. This private key should have some CELO balance used for gas to sign the report transactions.

### Setting up your keys in the node

> In the instructions to generate an account and store it the node can be found [here](https://docs.celo.org/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#create-an-account-and-get-its-address).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instructions to generate an account and store it in the node can be found [here](https://docs.celo.org/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#create-an-account-and-get-its-address).
```

---
title: Running Oracles
description: How to run an oracle for Mento, the stability protocol.
---

# Running oracles

> Oracles are a fundamental piece for Mento, the stability protocol behind Celo stable assets. Their propose is to forward to the blockchain the price of CELO/USD, CELO/EUR and CELO/BRL. You can read the [Celo Oracle documentation](celo-codebase/protocol/stability/oracles) to get an overview of how they work.

Author: ```suggestion
Oracles are a fundamental piece for Mento, the stability protocol behind Celo stable assets. Their purpose is to forward to the blockchain the price of CELO/USD, CELO/EUR and CELO/BRL. You can read the [Celo Oracle documentation](celo-codebase/protocol/stability/oracles) to get an overview of how they work.
```

# Getting started

> Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and push them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).

Reviewer 2: oh yep and `pushes` would match `fetches`

> Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and push them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).

Author: ```suggestion
Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and pushing them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).
```

> Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and pushing them on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Oracles work by running a client that fetches the price from centralized exchanges (CEX) and pushes those prices on-chain by calling `SortedOracles.report(address token, uint256 value, address lesserKey, address greaterKey)`. SortedOracles is a [Celo Core Contract](/community/release-process/smart-contracts).

```

A [reference implementation](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle) of such client is written in TypeScript and would be used for this guide. Releases for this client can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/releases).

## Requriments
* One VM dedicated for each oracle is recommended, but it is acceptable that they run multiple instances in the case they are for different stables.

> * A dedicated full node running in its own VM. Minimal hardware requirements and instructiosn on how to run a full node can be found [here](/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#:~:text=Full%20nodes%20play%20a%20special,other%20full%20nodes%20and%20validators.).

Reviewer 3: `instructiosn` -> `instructions`

> * A dedicated full node running in its own VM. Minimal hardware requirements and instructiosn on how to run a full node can be found [here](/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#:~:text=Full%20nodes%20play%20a%20special,other%20full%20nodes%20and%20validators.).

Author: ```suggestion
* A dedicated full node running in its own VM. Minimal hardware requirements and instructions on how to run a full node can be found [here](/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#:~:text=Full%20nodes%20play%20a%20special,other%20full%20nodes%20and%20validators.).
```

* The private key of an address on Celo, which can be stored on a private key file, on a HMS or hosted in the full nodes itself. More information about each can be found below.

> It is not strictly required but it is recommended to have the [Celo CLI](/command-line-interface/introduction#what-is-the-celo-cli) avaiable at least in your local enviroment, and ideally in each VM. It could be specially useful to respond to on-call.

Author: ```suggestion
It is not strictly required but it is recommended to have the [Celo CLI](/command-line-interface/introduction#what-is-the-celo-cli) available at least in your local environment, and ideally in each VM. It could be especially useful to respond to on-call.
```

## Setting up the environment

Find the latest stable Docker Image for the oracle in the oracle releases [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/releases).

From the oracle VM, make sure you can access your node. This can be done via the Celo CLI with this command:

`celocli node:synced --node YOUR_NODE_HOSTNAME:YOUR_NODE_PORT`

:::warning

> Using Forno or other public full node providers to run the oracles in production is strongly unencouraged. Oracles doing so wouldn't be elegible for rewards.

Reviewer 3: `unecouraged` -> `discouraged` perhaps?

> Using Forno or other public full node providers to run the oracles in production is strongly unencouraged. Oracles doing so wouldn't be elegible for rewards.

Author: ```suggestion
Using Forno or other public full node providers to run the oracles in production is strongly discouraged. Oracles doing so wouldn't be elegible for rewards.
```

:::

> The oracle is configured by passing individual enviroment variables or an env file when starting the Docker container. You'll need to create a env file named `.env.prod` in your oracle VM. A template env file in a format accepted by Docker can be found in the [Github repository](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/.env.prod). A list of all the available, as well as required variables, can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/README-config.md).

Reviewer 3: `a env` -> `an env`

> The oracle is configured by passing individual enviroment variables or an env file when starting the Docker container. You'll need to create a env file named `.env.prod` in your oracle VM. A template env file in a format accepted by Docker can be found in the [Github repository](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/.env.prod). A list of all the available, as well as required variables, can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/README-config.md).

Author: ```suggestion
The oracle is configured by passing individual enviroment variables or an env file when starting the Docker container. You'll need to create an env file named `.env.prod` in your oracle VM. A template env file in a format accepted by Docker can be found in the [Github repository](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/.env.prod). A list of all the available, as well as required variables, can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-oracle/blob/main/README-config.md).
```

AWS:
* `WALLET_TYPE=AWS_HSM`
* `AWS_KEY_REGION`

Azure:
* `WALLET_TYPE=AZURE_HSM`
* `AZURE_KEY_VAULT_NAME`

### Using a private key

:::warning
This method is not recommended in production as the private key remains unencrypted in the VM.
:::

You can create a new private key with:

`$ celocli account:new`

The output field of `privateKey` should be stored to a file and its path should be set in the env variable `PRIVATE_KEY_PATH`. Aditionally `WALLET_TYPE` should also be set to `PRIVATE_KEY`. This private key should have some CELO balance used for gas to sign the report transactions.

### Setting up your keys in the node

Instructions to generate an account and store it in the node can be found [here](https://docs.celo.org/getting-started/mainnet/running-a-full-node-in-mainnet#create-an-account-and-get-its-address).

### Recommended configuration

:::warning

WARNING: it is encouraged that before running the oracles in production, they should run for at least a week in one of the Celo Public testnets.

:::

> The configuration currently run by cLabs in production can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/tree/master/packages/helm-charts/oracle) for each stable token. It is strongly advised not to modify the recommended values, specially the exchange sources, at least there is good data to support it.

Reviewer 3: `specially` -> `especially`?
`at least` -> `unless`?

The only variable that is not set in the env file is `PRICE_SOURCES`. This sets what exchanges and prices shall be used to report. It is recommended to store this in a file called `price_sources` and the export the content to a new env variable with `cat`.

`export PRICE_SOURCES=$(cat price_sources)`

An example of such file for CELO/USD is:

```
[
  [{ exchange: 'BITTREX', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [{ exchange: 'COINBASE', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [{ exchange: 'OKCOIN', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [
    { exchange: 'BINANCE', symbol: 'CELOBUSD', toInvert: false },
    { exchange: 'COINBASE', symbol: 'BUSDUSD', toInvert: false },
  ],
]
```

:::tip

Note that this example configuration is using three direct pairs, and the last one is an implicit pair calculated using two exchanges. This is useful in the case extra liquidity is required to calculate the price.

:::

#### Existing exchange connectos

Available connectors are, in alphabetical order: 
* Binance
* Bitso
* Bittrex
* Coinbase
* Novadax
* OkCoin

## Running the node

> Once all the enviroment variables are set in the VM, an oracle can be started with:

Author: ```suggestion
Once all the environment variables are set in the VM, an oracle can be started with:
```

`docker run --name celo-oracle -it --restart unless-stopped --env-file .env.prod -e PRICE_SOURCES=$PRICE_SOURCES us-west1-docker.pkg.dev/celo-testnet-production/celo-oracle/celo-oracle:1.0.0-rc2`

> If your oracle it's not yet enabled by governance, you'll see these messages in the terminal:

Reviewer 3: `it's` -> `is` ?

> If your oracle it's not yet enabled by governance, you'll see these messages in the terminal:

Author: ```suggestion
If your oracle is not yet enabled by governance, you'll see these messages in the terminal:
```

`Account 0x... is not whitelisted as an oracle for CURRENCY_PAIR`

As soon as governance enables it, the node should start reporting automatically.

## Governance

The last step to run an oracle is to enable their addresses on-chain using the [Celo Governance Process](/celo-codebase/protocol/governance#what-is-celo-governance). Only addresses allowed by governance are allowed to report. Thus, the first step to spin up a new oracle is creating a governance proposal and submit on-chain for community voting. An example of such proposal can be found [here](https://github.com/celo-org/governance/blob/main/CGPs/cgp-0057.md). To find more details about how the governance process work, [check here](/celo-codebase/protocol/governance).

> ## Using kubernets

Reviewer 3: `kubernets` -> `kubernetes`?

> ## Using kubernets

Author: ```suggestion
## Using kubernetes
```

The only variable that is not set in the env file is `PRICE_SOURCES`. This sets what exchanges and prices shall be used to report. It is recommended to store this in a file called `price_sources` and the export the content to a new env variable with `cat`.

`export PRICE_SOURCES=$(cat price_sources)`

An example of such file for CELO/USD is:

```
[
  [{ exchange: 'BITTREX', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [{ exchange: 'COINBASE', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [{ exchange: 'OKCOIN', symbol: 'CELOUSD', toInvert: false }],
  [
    { exchange: 'BINANCE', symbol: 'CELOBUSD', toInvert: false },
    { exchange: 'COINBASE', symbol: 'BUSDUSD', toInvert: false },
  ],
]
```

:::tip

Note that this example configuration is using three direct pairs, and the last one is an implicit pair calculated using two exchanges. This is useful in the case extra liquidity is required to calculate the price.

:::

#### Existing exchange connectos

Available connectors are, in alphabetical order: 
* Binance
* Bitso
* Bittrex

> * Coinbase

Author: ```suggestion
```
